date and place of birth wilfred bruce truax i was
born october 15 1922 in donna texas i went through
school except for the fifth grade all of it there in
donna the fifth grade i spent one semester in
wisconsin and one semester in Waco, Texas. This
had come about primarily because our house had
burned that summer before.
Was this a fire of natural origin? No, it came
about, my dad was always experimenting and trying
to improve things around the house. He was trying
to get a water heater working and there was an
explosion. He was out in the yard at the time of the
explosion, but it apparently scattered fuel
pretty good because by the time he turned around,
the whole house was on fire. This must have been a
fairly unsettling experience for the family. Did
y'all lose all your possessions? Almost
entirely. My dad got back in as far as the kitchen
and the only two things I can remember is he pulled
the drawer of the ordinary silverware we used and
also carried out the electric cooker that we had.
Other than that, why, and then of course a little
bit of salvage of few pictures and this where they
were in a deep stack that it have burned edges but
not completely burned up and but nearly
everything else this was of course in the
depression 33 and it was amazing how good people
were to us we
took us in at various places. We stayed and what
have you. Well, I think each of the kids' classes, I
know mine specifically did, they all brought
various things from home or knew. You feel that
people took care of each other more then than they
do now?
I tend to believe this in a sense. Of course you got
to keep in mind too though that this is the
difference of a town of 3,000 against
living in 150, 200,000 city.
Everybody tended to be a little closer probably
and know each other's problems more and This
probably couldn't have happened really at a worse
time during the deep part of the Depression.
What was your father's occupation?
As far back as I could remember, he was in the
electrical business. At this particular time, he
was working for David Wilson, an electrical
contractor there in town. After we came back from
Wisconsin and Waco, he went into business for
himself. I see. And could you give us your dad's
name? My dad was Tuxton Burrell Truax. Remember
where he grew up? He grew up primarily out at
Novice, which is about 15, 18 miles west of
Coleman. And your mother, can you remember her
name and where she grew up? My mother was... Ada
Buckmaster, she grew up primarily in Wisconsin.
She and dad met in New Mexico, where she was
teaching school. But her father was a doctor and
one time was head of the state and St. Asylum
institution there in Wisconsin. I take it then
your mother was fairly uneducated when Yes, she
was. It's a little interesting that their 50th
wedding anniversary, I met a man who, in New
Mexico, she had had as a pupil, that they had just by
accident run in there. He heard the clerk mention
the name Truax in the grocery store. And this was,
he remembered. my mother and renewed an
acquaintance.
Did your mother go to college? She did? I'm sure she
did, but I'm really not this sure where. At
Janesville, I think, but I'm not this positive.
Well, when did you graduate from high school? I
graduated from Donna High School in 1940.
Do you remember anything about the high school
there? The size? I believe, if I remember right,
there were 320 in high school, and I believe there
were 39 or 40 in our graduating class. Do you
remember anything about your high school
experiences, anything that comes to mind at that
time? It might give some bearing on the education
at that time. No, not really. We had
just primarily one teacher to a subject type
thing, and there was one or two of them.
They'd always done real well in math in high
school, and when I got to A&M, why, I decided that it
was only because it had been so easy. And where
chemistry, at that time at least, was considered
kind of a bust-out course, I made B's in it because
of a good foundation from a good instructor. You
felt you were fairly well prepared then to enter
college, then, from your grades? Yes, I was
probably third or fourth in our high school class.
As a freshman, I had the highest grades in the
class. How did you wind up going to A&M? What
motivated you to go there? I think primarily my
father. I can't ever really recall him ever
talking specifically about it, except that
somewhere or another he had me convinced I wanted
to go to college. I grew up working with him even
before he went into business for himself,
weekends and such as this. He was always one of
great patience and would answer any kind of
questions or what have you. And
like I say, he had not even finished Well, I'm not
sure how far he got, but I know he didn't finish high
school, and I'm not sure he ever got to high school.
And this was one of the things that he made
every effort to convince me that I wanted to
in a roundabout way, not pressuring you or the way
that you would rebel and not want to go. I can
remember writing themes in Spanish about wanting
to go to A&M, major in engineering, and go to South
America. Traveling
in the service took the South America desire out
some. However, I always liked traveling.
What were your first impressions? First of all,
when did you arrive at A&M, and what were your first
impressions? Well, this is, I'm sure, in one
sense, some different.
Boy, at one time, my dad went to a short course with
an Alton Bird, who lived there in Donner still, but
long years ago, before I can remember, they were in
an auto shop business together. And we went to,
they went to a short course, and I went up there with
them. And their son was, Mr. Bird's son was in
college at that time. And immediately after I
graduated from high school, that week following,
I hitchhiked up there and spent a week with George
Bird just before his graduation. In a sense, this
was,
well, it didn't have any real repercussions in
that Burt Campbell, who was orderly for George as a
freshman and George a senior,
made up my bed, took me to breakfast meals and this
sort of thing, When then in the following year I'm
in the same company with Burt Campbell as a
sophomore and me as an incoming freshman. I see.
And when did, what did you start in the fall of 1940?
In the fall of 1940. I see. I entered. What company?
In headquarters signal company. And what was your
major at this point? Electrical engineering.
Electrical engineering. What do you remember
from your freshman year? Was it particularly hard
on you? Was the hazing severe?
I'd always looked at the hazing a little different
I guess than than lots in the they
it appeared a good deal to me as far as you taking
care of an upperclassman's room for a year and you
get your room taken care of for three years and It
seems like a good trade. Yeah, this is...
I got caught eating cake when you shouldn't have
and drank the castor oil and ate spinach. And, of
course, I can remember trying to haze me drinking
buttermilk, but I like buttermilk and I like
spinach, so lots of these things didn't bother me
like some of them. The chew in the back, I got sick.
The hazing though was not particularly physical
at this time. No, it was very physical much of the
time. Of
course the sophomores, were running it. The one
thing that to me broke down later, and I often
wondered if this is when they started going
straight through and it wasn't that period
between the end of your sophomore year and the
beginning of the junior year and this, that they
didn't want to quit. But as a freshman,
In our company, at least, it was very resonant.
Specifically, a senior could call for a freshman,
and all freshmen could come running. A junior
could call fish so-and-so, and that freshman
would come running. A sophomore had to go get him a
freshman if he wanted a detailed run.
One of the worst things you could do would be not to
speak to and or go meet friends of a senior. He
didn't ever say anything to you, but he got him a
junior and that junior got in several sophomores
and the sophomores got all were freshmen. So that
it was a strict type of chain of command, so to
speak. Do you feel later why this seemed to break
down and the juniors and seniors were hazing just
as much as the sophomores were? Do you feel that the
seniors or juniors kept the hazing in line? Did the
sophomores do most of the physical hazing? Yes,
the sophomores primarily did. Well, before the
first football game, the company commander
announced there would be a company meeting at the
second floor in the hall there. With it, they lined
up with boards, and the juniors went through, and
the sophomores went through, and the freshmen
went through, and they went on to football games.
And then juniors lined up, and sophomores went
through, and the freshmen went through, and they
went on, and then the sophomores lined up. But
primarily, the
seniors and the juniors were the ones who
controlled it, but they didn't do the hazing. And I
say they didn't do the hazing. Some freshmen got
real out of line. A senior would collar in a couple
of juniors, and those juniors in turn that same
chain of command to the sophomores. And the
sophomores would have the whole freshman class in
our company there. Keep in mind, though, that they
did have some, in a sense, reverse outlets.
Halloween night, the juniors came around and got
the freshmen. And we out and dug a mud hole. And
sophomores were free game then in our class. And
they were hauled out and dumped the mud hole and it
was it was not gentle to say the least they could
fight and look there were always more freshmen
than there were same way we'd have
semi-controlled i guess you would say tackle
football games with just towels for padding and
that's all so that you did have some in a sense uh
semi-legal opportunities to vent your anger at
the sophomores, and yet the system still worked.
Do you feel like you learned anything from this
particular
discipline, shall we call it? Do you feel like
there was anything to be learned from this, that
there was a point to it?
I always felt that this was was one part of that that
made you closer as a unit through your years there.
Because almost, except
for rare exceptions, and we had a couple who
just delighted in hazing, I guess you'd say. But
primarily, it was the chain of command type thing
and not just indiscriminately. Hazing for
hazing. Right. Now, I'm not sure that this is true
on the whole campus by any means. I think that there
are some of the other places where
maybe it was a difference in the group. All of them,
of course, in the Signal Corps at least started
out. signed up for EE. They didn't all necessarily
stay there all the way through, but this was the way
you ended up in the Signal Corps to begin with. I
see. Do you feel that maybe this taught you
self-discipline in a way? Could it teach you to
discipline yourself as far as having to follow
certain rules and regulations? There were places
you were supposed to be at certain times and things
you did at certain times and things you did not do.
Do you feel this way? I felt very definitely that it
did. And it also The hazing bit
was controlled, the study, and this is one of the
places some of the stories you heard make you think
then that it wasn't as controlled as some of the
other units. Seven o'clock, call the quarters,
you got at your desk and you stayed at your desk even
if you had to prop your head up until 11 o'clock. The
only place you could go would be to the restroom and
back to your room, and that was it. You didn't go
visit any other freshmen anywhere. You stayed in
your room and were supposed to study. There was no
time that any of the upperclassmen interfered
with this study time, sending you on details or
anything else. I gathered that this, as I said,
didn't necessarily hold true to all the other
units. Do you think this taught you how to study?
How to discipline your time? Not really, but it was
if you went ahead and used it, why it helped. And
there was at 11 o'clock you went to bed, however
I don't know if there was a specific time, but I've
been up as early as 3 o'clock working on a drawing or
something like this. And there never seemed to be a
limit at what time you could get back up again. But
you did go to bed at 11 o'clock and lights out. I see.
Do you remember anything else about your freshman
year? Any of the courses that were particularly
hard? Well, primarily, of course, I did standard
engineering, freshman engineering.
curriculum.
Trig, as I mentioned before, after I got up there,
I'm not that sure of my math background since I
don't remember ever having heard of Trig before I
went to college.
And the math, I guess, primarily was where I had my
hardest time as a sophomore year busting
the first semester I guess the second semester
first semester of calculus is the only course I
ever busted but did you lose a lot of people that
first year out of your freshman class a lot as I
don't remember exactly how many we started with in
the company but there were somewhere 28 or 30
would be my recollection and as I recall we end up
with something like 12 and this included the end of
our freshman year included a couple of frogs
midterm transfers.
As you went along are there any particular
professors that you have that you remember that
you think might have helped you or been
inspirational? who maybe took particular pains
with you, or any that you had a close relationship
that you recall? I would think in the EE
department, of course,
LL Four Acre was probably one that,
don't know if it's necessarily inspiration, but
more understanding of some of your problems and
this and than any I had, and I had him, I guess, as
sophomore and junior on some courses. You, in the
department at that time, of course, Rhodey was one
who was, always amazed you.
He could ride around the room about three times
during a one-hour class. Let's get back a little
bit. Do you remember any impressions about the
campus when you got there? What you felt about the
whole physical nature of it? Was it over, was it
friendly?
Or was it a stark sort of place? No, it was, of
course, we lived in, at that time, the new dorms,
the 1 to 12.
I'd always thought
that the campus was well landscaped and they
changed it with the seasons.
It was always to me a
thrill, so to speak, hitchhiking back and come in
the East Gate, it was a long ways back up to the norm
area, but even so, it was a sense of being home, so to
speak. You mentioned hitchhiking. Did most of the
students hitchhike? There were a tremendous
number, I would say, hitchhiked.
As I recall, there wasn't anybody in our company
had a car on the campus. when I was a freshman, and I
could be mistaken about some of the... Were you
allowed cars if you had one at this time? There were
a few cars on the campus. Whether this was because
of a disability or what, this was never my worry
since it was all I could do to stay there. How did you
finance your education? Did your father help you?
Did you work any? Primarily my father. I mean, I
worked for him all the time at no wages, so to speak,
and
this part of it. Oh, at one time I did wait tables
some in the mess hall. Steve, was this before or
after the war? We'll get to the war in a minute. I
believe this was probably after the war had
started, but before I'd gone on active duty. Okay,
we'll get to that in a minute. Is there anything
else you remember about these pre-war days at A&M?
Oh, we were talking about the discipline, the
regimentation, so to speak.
Obviously, it all agreed with me since when I
started as a Freshman, I weighed 130 pounds, and at
Easter, I weighed 168. How was the food?
Excellent. It was very good. Yes. You got enough to
eat? No question about it. It was family style.
Were you eating a Dunkin' at this time? A Dunkin'.
Mm-hmm. As a freshman, did you have any trouble
eating? Did they give you any harassment about...
No, as I said a while ago, sometimes they would feel
like they were hazing you to make you eat spinach or
make you drink buttermilk or some of these things.
That's no problem. Some, right, this was, I
got my fill of turnip greens one time and it took
years to ever eat them again, but other than that, I
know Did they ever stop you from eating certain
things? Did they say, you know, y'all can't have
this tonight? Only dessert, and this was, of
course, we used to get out every morning, 6 o'clock
or whenever it was, so many days left till Kush,
eating dessert. And anybody asked and gave the
wrong day while you started all over, so we almost,
I don't recall that we ever worked down to where
This was legal. So this went on pretty much your
entire freshman year? Yes. But it didn't hurt you
any? No, not. They weren't depriving you of enough
food to keep you alive. You
were there when war was declared in December of
1941. Can you remember the mood of the campus when
war was declared, the feeling?
Well, I recall that Sunday afternoon,
specifically, everybody in a sense kind of hushed
homes and
shocked and amazed. There was a feeling of
disbelief then? Well, in a sense, yes. However,
they had already started this where you belong to
the enlisted reserve before you could
participate in advanced ROTC and this sort of
thing. As I recall, I
had gotten my papers because this was, of course,
then in my sophomore year and you were to do this
before
at the end of the school term so you would be ready
the following year for consideration of advanced
ROTC. I see. Was it advanced ROTC at this time, was
it difficult to get into? Were they very
selective? No. As I recall, most who wanted it got
in. It may not have been quite that easy, I'm not
real sure. Now, war was declared when you were a
sophomore at this time. Probably toward the end of
the semester. Well, toward the end of the first
semester of the sophomore year. Now, what
happened after war was declared? What went on on
the campus? Do you remember what preparations
were made, gearing up for wartime activities? The
only big change that I can recall at this
particular time was change in the ROTC
instructors took place more rapidly. And as I
recall, they
were thinned down to a certain extent also.
But this took place over a period of time. As a
freshman and sophomore, we had A man who was a staff
sergeant who received a direct commission, and as
a captain, and with his longevity and kids,
was about the second highest paid military
personnel on the campus. How long did it take him to
get rolling? Did the second semester go smoothly,
or did they interrupt you at any time during the
second semester?
No, I recall no interruptions. So you went on
through your sophomore year? I went through and
finished my sophomore year, and actually this is
when then they started going straight through
three semesters a year. And my finances being what
they were, I laid out and worked that summer here in
Corpus Christi and went back in the fall. And on
this basis then, you didn't start. advanced ROTC
at mid-turn, so I was actually then in December or
approximately before I rejoined an ROTC unit. I
lived in
Goodwin Hall, I guess it was. As a civilian
student? Yes. Did you have to wear a uniform? We
still wore a uniform, but we were not in the Corps as
such. So you were getting ahead academically
ahead of your military then? Right. So then in the
mid- then what was not mid-semester, when did you
rejoin a unit now? Well actually it would be the
beginning of my academic senior year, but it
turned out it was my junior year. And then it was in
this semester when we all went on active duty,
all those who were in advanced ROTC. The units all
left the campus for approximately a week, as I
recall. Do you remember when this was?
Approximately what day was it? March. March of 43.
As mentioned before, you To be an advanced ROTC,
you had to be an enlisted reserve, and this was a
matter of calling up the enlisted reserve. I see.
From A&M,
units went various places.
In the Signal Corps, we went to Camp Beauregard,
Louisiana. There were those who went to Camp
Walters. those went to Fort Sam Houston. These
were all induction centers.
Where did you go? I went to Beauregard, Louisiana.
For how long? It took about a week. We went through
the standard battery of tests and were issued in
uniforms and taken down to Camp Livingston for
inoculations, and then put on a train back to the
campus and we finished our regular semester. Were
you on active duty and being paid? Yes. The whole
time? Just after we were called active duty. And
what rank did they consider you all as? As a
private. As a private, and they were paying you all
as private? Right. I see. Okay, after you came back
to the campus, you went ahead and finished that
semester? We finished our regular classes that
semester and immediately after at the end of the
term scattered to the winds again. Those, and here
again I'm talking now not class of 44, because I, in
this ROTC business, I was really with the class of
45, having missed a year of ROTC. But all of these in
this class went to various training camps for
basic training before going to OCS. Those who were
actually in the class of 44 went directly, and I say
directly, almost directly to OCS, I believe.
What camp did you go to? There was a train load of us.
We first went to Fort Sam, and then from there on a
train to Camp Roberts, California. As the story
goes, I wasn't there, but supposedly some of them
working in the supply room, the colonel came in and
said, boy, there's been a mistake made. All of
y'all are not supposed to have been here. Those of
us there at the time were cavalry, Coast Guard
cavalry, no, no field artillery. Calvary, Coast
Artillery, Engineers, Signal Corps, and
Infantry. And almost immediately, those of us
that had been in Signal Corps over D.C. went to Camp
Kohler close to Sacramento. The Coast Artillery
went to Camp McQuaid, and the Engineers went on up
to Camp Abbott in Oregon. And this was basic
training? This was basic training. and was
probably some of the best military
training I ever had, and the company commander got
out, y'all are ROTC, you're supposed to be able to
know how to march, let's see. We marched, and he
said, there's no sense in spending time on that,
we'll go to something else. Fortunately, we went
to Camp Kohler, they had a, training program set
up, and we were doing things that we had done the
first six weeks. We were in freshman ROTC. Did they
keep the A&M people together? We stayed together,
yes. You didn't have any people coming in from the
outside? We had a few, and really you feel sorry for
them because they were behind. Some of them,
right. We had one or two draftees there at at Camp
Roberts that were in a unit with, well, it was a
whole battalion, training battalion, full of
nothing but Aggies.
So there was no way that they could do it. And
eventually, as I recall, they got them
transferred out.
How long were you in basic training?
Until September, I believe it was, October.
It was supposedly the pretty much standard basic
training. Do you remember how many weeks?
Not for positive. It was about the middle of July
when we went to Camp Kohler after having been there
at Camp Roberts for about six weeks. I see.
Somewhere about the first of October, we were
assigned to an ASTP unit. We were sent back to A&M to
be in the ASTP. What's an ASTP unit? Army Student
Training Unit Program. Okay. You were sent back to
the State College? Still as a group.
I was presumed primarily because there wasn't an
opening in OCS because after one semester of this
we did go on to OCS. Now wait a minute, so you were
back at A&M for another full semester then? For,
right, it was a speeded up and these were, we ended
up getting some hours credit just as a
transcript shows full military referral ROTC
credit by having gotten a commission. These hours
were added to just as if you'd taken them there at
A&M. Now, wait a minute. You're talking about
getting a commission. After basic training, you
still were not commissioned, were you? No. No. We
went to the STP unit. Then from there, we went to
Fort Monmouth, New Jersey to Signal Corps. Do you
remember when this was? We went in February, right
towards the end of February, and this was quite a
change weather-wise. And it still has a unit to
OCS? All of us in the Signal Corps, yes. The other
units were going various directions, and I'm not
positive that all of them came back. A number of the
various different ones did come back.
But I can't be positive about all of them coming to
ASTP before they went to OCS. I know the group that I
was with in the Signal Corps did. So you were at OCS
for how long? I got out of OCS in June. Now your A&M
training and all the other military training, did
you have any trouble with OCS? No, not
particularly. Were all the people here, your OCS
training unit, were they A&M people? No, all of
those of us in the ROTC were in this class, but there
were some other classes.
I don't remember ever seeing Mr. Foraker
afterwards this. but one experience that I recall
well was there was a group from Clemson, and they
were talking about one of their prof and imitating
him, and they said, well, that sounds like Four
Acre. Well, it is Four Acre. It was my
understanding that it was Four Acre's either twin
brother or brother, but there were these from
Clemson. There were a few from
regular Army enlisted personnel that were there
at OCS class, but primarily it was the two largest
groups in our class, I think, were Clemson ROTC and
A&M ROTC units. How did A&M ROTC units at this time
stack up against the other schools? I think we did
probably pretty close to equally well. We had I had
two pretty close friends that busted out. The big
problem primarily was barracks inspection while
you were at class and having the closing button or
some such thing as this and even work
out trying to help and check them and that kind of
thing and you'd get down for formation to go to
class and they'd forgotten something and run back
up and mess up something in their hurry and this
sort of thing. The A&M people pretty much stick
together over this then? Yes. Try to help one
another through. Yes. So you got out of OCS in June?
I believe this is right in June. Then you were
commissioned at that point? At that point,
commissioned, yes. Then what? I went to officer
school for about six weeks. It was called Long
Lines Inside, which is telephone equipment,
switchboards, teletype, repeaters, this sort of
equipment, and then was assigned to a unit. This
was also at Fort Monmouth. and then was assigned to
a casual detachment group that
went overseas with—Signal
Corps had what they called teams in this group that
went over. There were ten radio teams and five
switchboard teams.
Okay, let me stop just for a second here and turn my
tape over.